
===== PAGE 1 =====
240 | Nature | Vol 652 | 2 April 2026
Article
Accurate predictions of disordered protein 
ensembles with ST ARLING
Borna Novak1,2,3,4, Jeffrey M. Lotthammer2,3,4, Ryan J. Emenecker2,3 & Alex S. Holehouse2,3 ✉
Intrinsically disordered proteins and regions (collectively IDRs) are found across all 
kingdoms of life and have critical roles in virtually every eukaryotic cellular process1. 
IDRs exist in a broad ensemble of structurally distinct conformations. This structural 
plasticity facilitates diverse molecular recognition and function2– 4. Here we combine 
advances in physics-based force fields with the power of multi-modal generative deep 
learning to develop STARLING, a framework for rapid generation of accurate IDR 
ensembles and ensemble-aware representations from sequence. STARLING supports 
environmental conditioning across ionic strengths and demonstrates proof of 
concept for the interpolative ability of generative models beyond their training 
domain. Moreover, we enable ensemble refinement under experimental constraints 
using a Bayesian maximum-entropy reweighting scheme. Beyond ensemble 
characterization, STARLING sequence representations can be used in multiple ways. 
We showcase two examples: first, STARLING lets us perform ensemble-based search 
for ‘biophysical look-alikes’ . Second, we demonstrate how these latent representations 
can be used to accelerate ensemble-first sequence design from weeks or hours per 
candidate to seconds, enabling library-scale designs. T ogether, STARLING dramatically 
lowers the barrier to the computational interrogation of IDR function through the 
lens of emergent biophysical properties, complementing bioinformatic protein 
sequence analysis. We evaluate the accuracy of STARLING against extant experimental 
data and offer a series of vignettes illustrating how STARLING can enable rapid 
hypothesis generation for IDR function and aid the interpretation of experimental data.
IDRs are structurally heterogeneous protein regions that are estimated 
to constitute approximately 30% of eukaryotic proteomes1. Despite 
lacking a fixed structure, IDRs have key roles in essential cellular pro-
cesses such as transcription, translation and cell signalling1. Owing 
to their broad structural heterogeneity, IDRs must be described by 
a conformational ensemble: a large collection of structurally dis -
tinct and interchanging conformations 1. However, although IDRs 
cannot be represented as a single 3D structure, they do still possess 
sequence-encoded conformational biases, and ensembles can have 
essential roles in IDR function and may be perturbed in disease 2– 4. 
Just as structural biology has been instrumental in understanding the 
molecular basis for folded domain function, there is a growing appre-
ciation that the characterization of IDR ensembles may be important 
for understanding IDR function5,6.
Various experimental techniques have been applied to interrogate 
sequence–ensemble relationships7– 9. Although these report on specific 
aspects of IDR ensembles, they fall short of providing a holistic description 
of the distribution of conformers (that is, the 3D coordinates of all residues 
in the protein across many different conformations, referred to here as 
a ‘full structural ensemble’). T o achieve this, the integration of computa-
tional modelling with experimental data has proven an effective route10– 13.
Conceptually, computational models and experiments can be com-
bined in two different ways. One approach involves using physics-based 
models and reweighting or biasing towards experimental observa-
bles14,15. Another involves using experimental data to parameterize 
transferable force fields, which, in principle, do not require additional 
reweighting16. Although both approaches have been effective in provid-
ing insight into IDR behaviour, they require deep technical expertise to 
ensure reliable conclusions are drawn, and can also be computationally 
expensive.
Although recent advances in coarse-grained simulations17–19  offer a 
faster alternative (and both modalities described above can be applied 
here), even coarse-grained simulations can still take hours to obtain 
sufficient sampling and still require a relatively high level of technical 
expertise to set up, run and analyse. Recent deep learning predictors 
trained on coarse-grained simulations have enabled proteome-scale 
predictions for ensemble average values, but are limited to specific 
observables for which a predictor was trained (for example, radius of 
gyration (Rg) or radius of end-to-end distances (Re))20,21.
Deep learning approaches have transformed protein structure 
prediction, significantly reducing the barrier to large-scale explora-
tion of sequence–structure relationships22 (Fig. 1a). However, these 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10141-2
Received: 24 February 2025
Accepted: 14 January 2026
Published online: 18 February 2026
Open access
 Check for updates
1Medical Scientist Training Program, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. 3Center for Biomolecular Condensates (CBC), Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA. 4These authors contributed equally: Borna Novak, Jeffrey M. 
Lotthammer. ✉e-mail: alex.holehouse@wustl.edu

===== PAGE 2 =====
Nature | Vol 652 | 2 April 2026 | 241
methods are poorly suited to investigate IDRs23 owing to a reduction 
in alignment-based conservation in disordered proteins, a paucity of 
appropriate experimental training data and optimization for an inap-
propriate objective (predicting a single best structure from sequence, 
whereas IDRs should be described by a large, conformationally heteroge-
neous ensemble; Fig. 1b). In short, although we now possess easy-to-use 
tools for accurately predicting the 3D structure of folded proteins, equiv-
alent tools for rapid and accurate IDR ensemble prediction are lacking.
Here we addressed these challenges by developing a fast and accurate 
approach for predicting full coarse-grained disordered protein struc-
tural ensembles directly from the amino acid sequence. Our approach 
leveraged advances in generative modelling, a deep learning tech-
nique capable of creating new and original data. However, developing 
a generative model poses a key challenge: the need for large training 
datasets. T o address this, we performed large-scale coarse-grained 
simulations to generate full structural ensembles across tens of thou-
sands of natural and synthetic IDRs. The resulting method — STARLING 
— allowed us to generate structural ensembles directly from sequence 
in seconds. A major goal in developing STARLING was to avoid hardware 
barriers. Although STARLING is fast (approximately 35 conformers 
per second) on GPUs, it can still generate ensembles in minutes on 
Intel/AMD CPUs and seconds on Apple CPUs.
STARLING-generated ensembles show good agreement with experi-
mental data, enabling de novo exploration of uncharacterized IDRs or 
aiding in the biophysical interpretation of experimental data. More-
over, here we show proof of concept that STARLING can be used to  
Robust
multiple
sequence
alignment
Structure prediction
on foldable region
Poor
multiple
sequence
alignment
a b
c
e
g
f
d
‘Birds
on a
branch’
Structure prediction
on disordered region
Text-to-image model
Images
Sequence-to-
ensemble model
Prompt
(phrase)
Prompt
(protein
sequence)
Prompt
(protein
sequence)
Conformers
Four distinct and
uncorrelated images
Four distinct and
uncorrelated conformers
20,349
Natural
disordered
sequences
50,214
Synthetic
disordered
sequences
Coarse-grained molecular
dynamics simulation
Sequence clustering
MMseqs2One bead per residue
Train
(70%)
Validation
(15%)
Test
(15%)
Distance
maps
Z


Variational autoencoder
(distance map compression)
Latent-space
representation
Distance
map
Distance
map
DecoderEncoder
Contact map Contact map
2D
Gaussian
noise
Patches Patches
Convolution
Denoised
latent
space
Decoder
Conformer
I
Convolution
Conformer
2
Conformer
3
Conformer
4
Distance
map 1
Distance
map 2
Distance
map 3
Distance
map 4
Distance
map 1
Distance
map 2
Distance
map 3
Distance
map 4
Structure reconstruction
Positional
information
Vision
transformer
Sequence
conditioning
×12 layers
STARLING
V
V
FKV KDPCTG
FKV KDPCTG
FKV TEPCTG
KIKDPCTG
KVKEPCTG
FKV KDPCTG
-SQK DGEQP
--DQD PN
P-EE
RDP
EPE
DP
NR
QK
SKI
G
PQG
PTP
NQ
SH
P-V-
KV- -
GSIGHEAGHSNW
AGQGHRKPGHAH
AGSQGHRKKPGH
GWSMGHHQSQPK
GSIGHEAG
...
GWSMGHHQ
Fig. 1 | STARLING approach and model architecture. a, Deep learning has 
revolutionized protein structure prediction, with major advances being 
facilitated by large-scale evolutionary information. b , Structure prediction 
methods for folded domains are poorly suited for predicting the behaviour of 
IDRs. These limitations stem from the absence of a native-state structure and 
because evolutionary information is often poorly captured in multiple sequence 
alignments (MSAs) of IDRs. c , Generative text-to-image models enable the 
creation of many unique and independent images consistent with a single input 
prompt. d, IDR ensemble generation shares many similarities with text-to-image 
generation; we required many distinct, uncorrelated conformers, all of which 
are consistent with an input prompt (an amino acid sequence). e , STARLING  
was trained on approximately 50,000 amino acid sequences at 150 mM ionic 
strength and approximately 14,000 sequences at 20 mM and 300 mM ionic 
strength. The sequences performed at 20 mM and 300 mM ionic strength are a 
subset of those simulated at 150 mM ionic strength. For each sequence, hundreds 
of distinct conformers were generated using coarse-grained molecular 
dynamics simulations, and each conformer was converted into a distance map 
(an image). Sequences were split into training, testing and validation sets. The 
MARV cartoon was reproduced from ref. 61 , Martin Steinegger. f, STARLING 
makes use of a VAE to compress distance maps to a latent space, allowing a 
denoising diffusion model to work in this latent space (‘latent diffusion’).  
g, The overall architecture of the STARLING model combines a latent-space 
probabilistic denoising diffusion model with a vision transformer architecture 
using both convolutions and transformer blocks. Latent-space maps were 
decoded to real space via the VAE decoder. Finally, distance maps can be 
reconstructed into 3D coordinates via a parallelized multidimensional scaling 
approach.

===== PAGE 3 =====
242 | Nature | Vol 652 | 2 April 2026
Article
(1) investigate sequence–ensemble relationships for disordered pro-
teins; (2) explore bound-state conformational ensembles for binary 
disordered protein complexes; and (3) provide conformation-aware 
latent representations for IDR characterization, search and design. 
T ogether, we propose that the ease of use and speed of STARLING 
make it a powerful tool for democratizing large-scale exploration of 
sequence–ensemble relationships in IDRs.
Generative artificial intelligence (AI) has been transformative for 
text-to-image generation24,25. In text-to-image generative AI, an image 
is generated by passing a prompt (a short phrase describing the desired 
image) to a pre-trained deep learning model. The model then generates 
an image consistent with the prompt, a process referred to as infer-
ence. Deep learning models capable of inference must first be trained. 
For models used in modern text-to-image generative AI, training is 
not simply memorization but also learning the relationship between 
prompts and the features in the associated images. As a result, once 
a model is trained, if the same prompt is reused many times, it will 
generate many independent images entirely distinct from any of the 
individual instances observed in training. Of note, despite being dif-
ferent from one another, each generated image should be consistent 
with the prompt (Fig. 1c).
The mapping of a single text prompt to a collection of different 
images — each of which is consistent with the input prompt — is precisely 
the problem that we wished to solve for IDR ensemble generation. In 
IDR ensemble generation, we wanted to take a text prompt (amino acid 
sequence) and generate a collection of many distinct and uncorrelated 
IDR conformations consistent with that prompt (Fig. 1d). Moreover, 
we wanted this generation process to be fast (seconds) and possible 
on commodity hardware (laptops and desktops). T o achieve this goal, 
we combined a variational autoencoder (VAE) with a discrete-time 
denoising-diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) to create a latent dif-
fusion model25. The resulting method (STARLING) enabled the accurate 
and rapid prediction of coarse-grained conformational ensembles of 
IDRs.
STARLING was trained on approximately 50,000 unique rationally 
designed and naturally occurring IDR sequences (10–384 residues) 
simulated at 150 mM ionic strength (Supplementary Table 1). Among 
these, approximately 14,000 were additionally simulated at 20 mM 
and 300 mM ionic strength (Fig. 1e, Extended Data Fig. 1a,b and Supple-
mentary Table 2). Rationally designed sequences were designed using 
GOOSE26 (see Methods; Extended Data Fig. 1c–f). Although naturally 
occurring IDRs provide training data focused on the most relevant 
manifold of sequences, the inclusion of a large number of rationally 
designed sequences allowed us to construct training data that system-
atically titrates across sequence space, yielding a well-rounded training 
set that captures the extremes of sequence composition and patterning.
A necessary decision in deep learning models is defining the limits 
of your training data. We focused on sequences up to 384 amino acids 
in length for several reasons. First, almost 95% of naturally occurring 
IDRs across common model organisms are shorter than 384 amino acids 
(Extended Data Fig. 1h,i). Second, this length enables well-sampled 
coarse-grained simulations to be completed on a reasonable timescale. 
Third, the underlying architecture of the model requires a fixed upper 
limit (see Methods). Finally, experimental characterization of disor-
dered protein sequences longer than approximately 350 residues is 
lacking, making it difficult to assess the validity of model predictions 
relative to experiments for very long disordered proteins.
Molecular dynamics simulations were performed using the Mpipi-GG 
force field. Mpipi-GG20 — a variant of the original Mpipi force field17 — is a 
one-bead-per-residue coarse-grained model developed for disordered 
regions. Once run, conformations from simulations of a sequence of 
length n were converted into distance maps, n × n matrices, where 
each element describes the distance between the i-th and j-th residue 
for a specific conformation. This converts each IDR conformation into 
an ‘image’ , allowing us to directly leverage innovations developed for 
conditional image generation. Overall, our training dataset comprised 
nearly 12 million distance maps.
Two core limitations of DDPM models are their substantial memory 
requirements and the slow generative process during inference. These 
limitations arise from performing the reverse denoising process in a 
complex, high-dimensional space (for example, images of size 384 × 384 
pixels). T o mitigate this, we developed a VAE to compress each distance 
map into a lower-resolution latent space (24 × 24 pixels)27 (Fig. 1f). The 
denoising diffusion process can then occur in this latent space (latent 
diffusion), significantly reducing memory requirements and inference 
time. Given this, STARLING was trained in two independent stages.
We first trained a highly accurate VAE that enables the compression of 
full-resolution distance maps into latent space (Extended Data Fig. 2a). 
Our VAE uses a ResNet18 architecture and learns parameters for an 
encoder (full resolution to latent space) and a decoder (latent space 
to full resolution)28. We assessed the accuracy of VAE by encoding and 
decoding distance maps derived from sequences substantially different 
from those used in the training and validation sets. We evaluated our 
model on a held-out test set comprising approximately 16,000 simula-
tions, totalling nearly 2.5 million distance maps. The model achieved 
a root-mean-square reconstruction error (RMSE) of 1.16 Å (Extended 
Data Fig. 2b). Furthermore, our model accurately reconstructed 
bond lengths, with a root-mean-square reconstruction error of 0.18 Å 
(Extended Data Fig. 2c), crucial for modelling protein conformations.
In the second stage of training, we developed a DDPM (Fig. 1d and 
Extended Data Fig. 2d–f). In brief, this model was trained to learn param-
eters that map random noise to individual latent-space conformer 
distance maps, conditioned on the associated amino acid sequence 
and ionic strength (see Methods). The training data came from nearly 
12 million distance maps across almost 78,000 simulations. Each map 
was first compressed into a latent space, and then the fixed forward 
diffusion process was used to add noise to each latent-space distance 
map. The underlying vision transformer model was then trained to 
learn parameters that reversed this forward diffusion process, condi-
tioned on the input amino acid sequence and ionic strength (Fig. 1g). 
Ultimately, ensemble generation is enabled by running many inference 
rounds in parallel, creating many independent distance maps.
Although training requires the VAE encoder to generate latent-space 
distance maps, only the VAE decoder is needed for inference once 
the model is trained. Ultimately, the fully trained model (STARLING) 
combines two different models (the VAE decoder and the DDPM) that 
work together to enable rapid ensemble prediction. Using default set-
tings, STARLING can generate 400 independent IDR conformations in 
approximately 12 s on a GPU (Nvidia A4000), 20 s on a Macbook Pro 
M3 CPU and approximately 6 min on an Intel CPU (Intel(R) Xeon(R) 
Silver 4210 R CPU @ 2.40 GHz; Extended Data Fig. 3a,b). The prediction 
runtime and memory are roughly independent of sequence length; 
400 conformations for a 50-amino-acid IDR took approximately 10 s, 
whereas 400 conformations for a 350-residue IDR took approximately 
14 s, and prediction times were not hampered by low-memory GPUs 
(Extended Data Fig. 3c–e).
We first checked that the STARLING-derived ensemble-averaged 
global dimensions agree with those obtained from the Mpipi-GG 
simulation of unseen sequences. In all cases, STARLING ensembles 
comprised 800 conformers. Using a held-out test set of approximately 
10,000 sequences, we performed Mpipi-GG simulations at 150 mM 
ionic strength and calculated R g and R e. Our STARLING-derived R g 
(RMSE = 0.85 Å, R2 = 0.996) and Re (RMSE = 3.48 Å, R2 = 0.989) values 
are in excellent agreement with the simulations (Fig. 2a,b).
As STARLING was also trained on Mpipi-GG simulations at both 
20 mM and 300 mM ionic strength, we verified that STARLING-derived 
ensemble-averaged global dimensions match the simulations. Using 
a held-out test set of approximately 3,000 unseen sequences, we per-
formed Mpipi-GG simulations at ionic strengths of 20 mM and 300 mM. 
Our STARLING-derived Rg (Fig. 2c,d; RMSE = 0.98 Å and 1.12 Å, R2 = 0.995 

===== PAGE 4 =====
Nature | Vol 652 | 2 April 2026 | 243
2
34
5
6
7
8
10
9
1
Rg (Å)
STARLING 
distribution
Mpipi-GG
distribution
H = 0
H = 0.8
Mpipi-GG Rg (Å)
STARLING Rg (Å)
Mpipi-GG Re (Å)
STARLING Re (Å)
RMSE = 3.48 Å
R2 = 0.989
Density
HighLow
Density
HighLow
a
e
g
j k
h i
f
b c d
RMSE = 0.85 Å
R2 = 0.996
Rg
20 40 60 80
20
40
60
80
50 100 150 200
50
100
150
200
Re
One conformer
P(ri,j)
ri,j (Å)
STARLING 
distribution
Ensemble
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Residue i
Residue j
One distance map
0
15
ri,j (Å)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Residue i
Residue j
Ensemble
Mpipi-GG
distribution
Rg (Å)
P(Rg )P(Rg )
STARLING distribution Mpipi-GG distribution
 Experimental value
H: 0.04
D: 0.02
L: 99
IBB
50 100
Rg (Å) Rg (Å) Rg (Å) Rg (Å) Rg (Å)
N98
50 100
H: 0.07
D: 0.07
L: 153
50 100
IL-1 H: 0.05
D: 0.03
L: 141
Msh6
50 100
H: 0.08
D: 0.08
L: 304
RpII215
50 100
H: 0.07
D: 0.07
L: 312
Hellinger distance
measures overlap
P(Rg )
Ensemble of distance maps
0 50
0
50
0 100
0
100
0 100
0
100
0 250
0
200
0 250
0
200
RpII215Msh6N98IL-1IBB
0 0.5
0 0.5
0 0.5
0 0.5
0 0.5
0 0.6
rij Hellinger distance
P(ri,j)
ri,j (Å)
H = 0.05
P(ri,j)
ri,j (Å)
H = 0.04
Residue i
Residue i
Residue i
Residue i
Residue i
Residue j Residue j Residue j Residue j Residue j
0 0.5
P(H)
P(H)
P(H)
P(H)
P(H)
P(H)
H H H H H H
Residue j
Residue i
20 40 60 80
20
40
60
80
Mpipi-GG Rg (Å)
STARLING Rg (Å)
Density
HighLow
RMSE = 1.12 Å
R2 = 0.992
25 50 75 100
20
40
60
80
100Mpipi-GG Rg (Å)
STARLING Rg (Å)
Density
HighLow
RMSE = 0.98 Å
R2 = 0.995
I = 150 mM 
 I = 150 mM 
Rg
 Rg
I = 20 mM I = 300 mM 
Histogram
H values
Fig. 2 | Evaluating STARLING on held-out simulation data. a, Comparison of 
STARLING-derived average Rg values with those from Mpipi-GG (simulations) from 
a set of approximately 10,000 unseen sequences. b , Comparison of STARLING- 
derived average R e values with those from Mpipi-GG (simulations) from 
approximately 10,000 unseen sequences. c, Comparison of STARLING-derived 
Rg values with those from Mpipi-GG (simulations) from a set of approximately 
3,000 unseen sequences at an ionic strength of 20 mM. d, Comparison of 
STARLING-derived Rg values with those from Mpipi-GG (simulations) from  
a set of approximately 3,000 unseen sequences at an ionic strength of 300 mM. 
e, STARLING ensembles enable the calculation of distributions of observables. 
Distribution similarity can be quantified by the Hellinger distance ( H), where 
H = 0 is perfect overlap and H = 1 is no overlap. f, Overlap of Rg distributions 
obtained from STARLING (blue bars) and Mpipi-GG (orange line), with the 
experimental value shown for completeness. Overlap between the STARLING 
and Mpipi-GG distributions was quantified by the H value and the KS statistic 
(D) to assess the difference between the distributions and the effect size of the 
difference. A KS statistic of 0.02 means that the CDFs of the two distributions 
differ by at most 2%. Vertical dashed lines indicate the average STARLING- 
derived value. g , 3D configurations (left) can be represented as distance maps 
(right), where each pixel defines the distance between a pair of residues ( rij).  
h, Ensembles of conformations (left) can be represented as ensembles of 
distance maps (right). i, Intra-residue distance distributions in STARLING 
ensembles can be compared with equivalent distributions from Mpipi-GG 
simulations. j, All possible intra-residue distances can be compared between 
STARLING and Mpipi-GG simulations using H to quantify overlap in distributions 
(top). Histograms of intra-residue H values are also shown (bottom). k , Pairwise 
inter-residue distance comparison across different exemplar ensembles 
reveals excellent overlap.

===== PAGE 5 =====
244 | Nature | Vol 652 | 2 April 2026
Article
and 0.992 for 20 mM and 300 mM, respectively) and Re (Extended Data 
Fig. 4a,b; RMSE = 4.17 Å and 4.53 Å, R2 = 0.986 and 0.978 for 20 mM 
and 300 mM, respectively) are again in the excellent agreement with 
simulations.
Model accuracy depends on the balance between ensemble size and 
denoising steps. By comparing STARLING results to long-timescale 
Mpipi-GG simulations, we found that error in the Rg stabilizes beyond 
30 denoizing steps and 400 conformations (Extended Data Fig. 4c–i). 
We adopted these as default parameters, although larger ensembles 
may be required for other order parameters.
As Re and Rg are highly correlated with sequence length, we next 
assessed the accuracy of our model on a set of length-matched 
sequences29. This approach allowed us to determine whether the model 
had effectively captured the influence of sequence chemistry on the 
global dimensions of IDRs, or whether it had simply learned to relate 
sequence length to these dimensions. Using all 100-residue, 200-residue 
and 300-residue sequences with distinct sequence chemistries from 
the held-out test set, we found excellent agreement across a range of 
Rg (Extended Data Fig. 4j; RMSE = 0.78 Å, 1.18 Å and 1.20 Å, R2 = 0.984, 
0.990 and 0.995 for 100-residue, 200-residue and 300-residue lengths, 
respectively) and R e (Extended Data Fig. 4k; RMSE = 3.38 Å, 4.22 Å 
and 5.65 Å, R2 = 0.965, 0.984 and 0.986 for 100-residue, 200-residue, 
300-residue lengths, respectively). These results gave us confidence 
that STARLING had learned bona fide sequence-to-ensemble rules 
instead of simply learning polymer scaling theory.
In addition to ensemble-averaged observables, full structural ensem-
bles enabled us to calculate distributions of any observable of interest 
(Fig. 2e). We set out to assess how well STARLING-derived global dimen-
sion distributions match distributions from simulations. We used the 
Hellinger distance (H) as a similarity measure to compare distributions. 
H ranges from 0 to 1, where zero indicates that the distributions are 
identical, and one signifies that they are entirely disjoint (Fig. 2e). The 
STARLING-derived Rg distributions show excellent agreement with distri-
butions from simulations (Fig. 2f). This overlap was quantified by a low H, 
confirming the high degree of similarity between the two distributions.
Finally, to quantify ensemble fidelity, we assessed all inter-residue 
distance distributions between ensembles generated using STARLING 
or Mpipi-GG simulations. Each 3D conformation can be represented as 
a single distance map (Fig. 2g), and the ensemble of conformations can 
be represented as an ensemble of distance maps (Fig. 2h). Therefore, 
every inter-residue distance distribution from a pair of residues in a 
STARLING ensemble can be compared against the corresponding dis-
tribution from an Mpipi-GG (Fig. 2i). For a 100-residue IDR, this yields 
4,900 unique distribution comparisons. We could quantify the overlap 
between the distributions using H and visualize each pair using a heat 
map (Fig. 2j, top). Furthermore, we could use histograms for those H 
to provide an overall assessment of the ensemble agreement (Fig. 2j, 
bottom). Overall, we found excellent agreement across all distance 
distributions investigated (Fig. 2k). In summary, all evidence supports 
that STARLING can directly predict conformational ensembles of dis-
ordered proteins from sequence.
Having established that STARLING can recapitulate simulated 
ensembles, we next investigated agreement with experimental data 
(Fig. 3a). We used a previously curated set of 133 sequences for which 
high-quality small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) data have been assem-
bled and computed average Rg values. We found excellent agreement 
between average Rg values from STARLING and SAXS-derived Rg, yield-
ing values comparable with state-of-the-art coarse-grained simulations 
(RMSE = 4.53, R2 = 0.90; Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 5a–h and Supple -
mentary Tables 3 and 4).
T o further validate STARLING, we predicted ensembles for 
3,417 IDRs from DisProt 30, successfully replicating established 
sequence-conformation trends (for example, aromatic residues 
drive compaction, whereas proline and glutamic acid promote expan-
sion3,20,31,32; Extended Data Fig. 5i–k and Supplementary Table 5). 
STARLING-generated ensembles are also sensitivity to minor sequence 
changes; when tested on four hnRNPA1 low complexity domain (LCD) 
variants, the predicted dimensions of the model quantitatively matched 
experimental SAXS data regarding aromatic content3 (Fig. 3c).
T o go beyond simple R g comparisons (Fig.  3b,c), we leveraged 
STARLING-generated ensembles to back-calculate synthetic SAXS 
curves using FOXS33. This allows for a direct comparison between our 
model and raw experimental SAXS data (down to 5–10 Å resolution). We 
demonstrated that STARLING accurately captures the subtle conforma-
tional shifts in A1-LCD variants, as reflected in their specific scattering 
profiles3. Next, we selected 12 unrelated IDRs for which high-quality 
scattering data were available and compared scattering profiles derived 
from STARLING ensembles with experimental data, finding excellent 
agreement across a wide range of sequence chemistries and sequence 
lengths (Fig. 3e and Supplementary Table 3). We further reanalysed 40 
additional sets of scattering data, finding that the majority are in excel-
lent agreement with STARLING-derived scattering profiles (Extended 
Data Fig. 6a and Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2). T ogether, our data sug-
gest that our STARLING ensembles faithfully reproduce experimentally 
measured IDR ensemble behaviour across a range of length scales and 
sequence chemistries.
Finally, we sought to compare against an alternative experi -
mental modality in single-molecule Förster resonance energy 
transfer (smFRET). Recent work has illustrated how a series of 16 
length-matched sequences shows a range of end-to-end distances 
depending on the underlying sequence chemistry 34. We compared 
predicted end-to-end distances (and, where available, SAXS-derived 
scattering data) for those 16 sequences, again finding good agreement 
between STARLING ensembles and experimental data (Fig. 3f, Extended 
Data Fig. 6b,c and Supplementary Table 3). Of note, our average error 
here across the 16 sequences (RMSE of 6.7 Å) is comparable with the 
differences obtained between different experimental groups in a recent 
smFRET benchmarking study35. Overall, our work suggests that STAR-
LING can generate full coarse-grain ensembles of IDRs that accurately 
capture experimental data.
Having established that STARLING can reproduce extant experimen-
tal data, we applied it to investigate a set of distinct IDRs across various 
contexts. These vignettes illustrate the types of rapid exploration and 
hypothesis generation that STARLING enables.
The master transcriptional regulator Myc (439 residues) underlies 
cell growth, metabolism and proliferation, and is frequently dysregu-
lated in many cancers36. Myc consists of a large N-terminal IDR (Myc1–361 ),  
a C-terminal HLH DNA-binding domain (Myc368–406 ) and a leucine zipper  
(Myc413–439 ). The large size of its IDR, coupled with its chemical com-
position, has challenged biophysical characterization (Fig. 4a). Using 
STARLING, we generated conformational ensembles of Myc 1–361  to 
investigate sequence-encoded conformational biases in the ensemble 
(Fig. 4b and Extended Data Fig. 6d). In particular, we wondered whether 
conformational behaviour would offer insight into regions within Myc 
known to bind to other partners (so-called Myc boxes). Curiously, the 
STARLING-derived ensemble suggests that Myc1–361  can be divided into 
two halves (IDR1 and IDR2). IDR1 (Myc1–200 ) is more compact and engages 
in intramolecular interactions and some long-range interactions. IDR2 
(Myc201–361 ) is more expanded with locally compact regions. Finally, 
conformationally distinct subregions align with established Myc-box 
boundaries, indicating local and long-range conformational proper-
ties can align with established functional annotations. Overall, these 
results predict that Myc1–361  contains strong sequence-encoded biases 
that may be correlated with (or even underlie) its function.
The C-terminal domain (CTD) of eukaryotic RNA polymerase II (RPB1) 
is a large IDR composed of tandem YSPTSPS heptad repeats, whose 
repeat number varies across species (52 in humans)37 (Fig. 4c). The 
CTD is believed to function as a multivalent interaction platform for 
transcriptional regulation. Extensive previous work has shown that 
low-complexity domains enriched in tyrosine (such as the CTD) are 

===== PAGE 6 =====
Nature | Vol 652 | 2 April 2026 | 245
25 50
 25 50
25 50
25 50
Rg
a b c d
STARLING 
Observable
Average
~10 s
Average STARLING
FOXS
Generate scattering 
curve
STARLING
distribution
Average SAXS
I(q)
q
e STARLING-derived scattering
curve
SAXS scattering
curve
f g
RMSE  = 4.53
STARLING-derived Rg distribution
and average
SAXS-derived average Rg
r2 = 0.90
20 40 60 80
SAXS Rg (Å)
20
40
60
80
STARLING Rg (Å)
20 40 60
20
15
10
5
Rg (Å)
A1 LCD variants (% Y/F)
I(q)
q (Å–1)
5% Y/F
10% Y/F
20% Y/F
15% Y/F
Aligned scattering curves from STARLING ensembles
105
103
10–210–3 10–1
10 20 30 40 50
STARLING Rg (Å)
5% Y/F
10% Y/F
15% Y/F
20% Y/F
P(Rg)
25 50
25 50
A1 LCD (20% Y/F)
A1 LCD (15% Y/F) A1 LCD (5% Y/F)
A1 LCD (10% Y/F)
25 50 25 50
/uni03B1-Syn
Ash1
25 50
RNA Pol II-CTD
ProT/uni03B1
25 50
25 50
Nup49 Fhua
cGAS1–154p531–91
25 50
q (Å–1) q (Å–1) q (Å–1) q (Å–1) q (Å–1) q (Å–1)
I(q)I(q)
STARLING-derived Re
distribution and average
smFRET derived average Re
0 50 100
Re (Å) Re (Å) Re (Å) Re (Å)
0 50 100 0 50 100 0 50 100 150
I(q) (log scale)I(q) (log scale)I(q) (log scale)I(q) (log scale)
q (Å–1)
10–2 10–1
sNrich
SAXS
sNh+
dTRBP
dCh–
20 40
20 40
20 40
20 40
sGrich
dGrich
sPTBP
sCh
s/uni03BAh
dCh+ dCh–
s/uni03BAl
dArich
dErich sNh+
dTRBP
d/uni03BAh
sNrich
dκl
sNh–
P(Re) P(Re) P(Re) P(Re)
Fig. 3 | Experimental validation of STARLING. a, STARLING enables rapid 
generation of ensembles from sequence. b, STARLING shows state-of-the-art 
accuracy in terms of predicting the average R g from sequence. IDR sequences 
(n = 133) comparing SAXS-derived and STARLING-derived average R g values 
(see also Extended Data Fig. 4c–f) are shown. c , STARLING accurately captures 
the effect of small numbers of mutations, here illustrating how altering the 
number of aromatic residues changes the global dimensions of a low-complexity 
domain (LCD) taken from the RNA-binding protein hnRNPA1. Y/F , tyrosine/
phenylalanine. d, Full scattering curves can be back-calculated from STARLING 
ensembles using FOXS, illustrating how changes in conformational behaviour 
alter both global dimensions (small angles and low q values) and the shape of 
the ensemble (intermediate and high q values). e , Comparison of 12 different 
SAXS profiles with scattering profiles calculated from STARLING ensembles. 
The insets show STARLING R g distributions, with average R g values from 
scattering data displayed as a solid black line. See also Extended Data Figs. 4j,k 
and 5a–h. f , STARLING-derived R e distance distributions with experimental 
values are shown as black lines for 16 different length-matched disordered 
protein sequences with different sequence chemistries. See also Extended 
Data Fig. 5i–k. g , SAXS scattering curves for unlabelled proteins for a subset of 
those in panel f.

===== PAGE 7 =====
246 | Nature | Vol 652 | 2 April 2026
Article
prone to intermolecular and intramolecular interactions, meaning 
that these domains would be expected to be relatively compact (driven 
by transient but numerous intramolecular contacts)3. Unexpectedly, 
previous in vitro work characterized an 81-residue fragment of the 
CTD with a seemingly highly extended radius of gyration, equivalent 
to that expected under strongly denaturing conditions (for example, 
8 M urea)38 (Extended Data Fig. 6e). This raises an apparent paradox: 
how can the CTD be simultaneously enriched for tyrosine, poised for 
intermolecular and intramolecular interactions, yet also appear to 
behave like a non-interacting, fully denatured polypeptide chain?
T o answer this question, we generated STARLING ensembles across 26 
different CTD lengths, complemented by all-atom Monte Carlo simula-
tions across five lengths. All-atom and STARLING-derived ensembles 
are in excellent agreement with one another, and with extant SAXS 
data for CTD variants of length 81 and 312 residues (Fig. 4d). This analy-
sis (see Methods; Extended Data Fig. 6f,g and Supplementary Fig. 3) 
revealed that the CTD in fact behaves with polymer statistics of an 
effective Gaussian chain, meaning it is poised to engage in intramo-
lecular and intermolecular interactions39. The seemingly extended 
nature of the ensemble is driven by the stiffness imparted by the size 
of the tyrosines and the high proline content (Extended Data Fig. 6h,i). 
Furthermore, comparisons of CTD dimensions calculated from in-cell 
single-molecule diffusion data by Ling et al. support a model in which 
the STARLING-derived CTD dimensions persist in live cells40 (Fig. 4e). 
These results reconcile previous observations and suggest that in cells, 
the CTD is primed for intermolecular interactions.
We next wondered whether we could tether two different 
IDRs together with a glycine-serine (GS) linker to investigate 
pseudo-intermolecular interactions (Fig. 4f). T ethering the C-terminal 
IDR from the histone H1.0 (H1.0 97–198 ) to the histone chaperone 
prothymosin-α (ProT α) enabled the formation of an electrostatically 
driven complex between the two proteins (Fig.  4g), as previously 
0 25
0 25
0
20
KRWRR
H1.0 CTD ProT/uni03B1(GS)80
101 residues
 111 residues
30
40
Rg (Å)
Isolation IsolationComplex Complex
H1.0 ProT/uni03B1
YSPTSPS YSPTSPS YSPTSPN YSPTSPS 
YSPTSPS YSPTSPS YSPTSPS YSPTSPS
YSPTSPS YSPTSPS YSPTSPS YSPTSPS
YSPTSPS YSPTSPS YSPTSPS YSPTSPS
YSPTSPS YSPTSPS YSPTSPN YSPTSPN
YTPTSPS YSPTSPS YSPTSPN YTPTSPN
YSPTSPS YSPTSPS YSPTSPSCTD(27x)
50 100 150 200 250 300 350
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Myc residue
Normalized  distance1.05 1.4
MBI MBII MBIII MBIV
200 4001Disoder
Myc1–361
 Nupr1 ProT/uni03B1(GS)5
82 residues
 111 residues
P(Rg)P(Rg)P(Rg)
25 50 75
Rg (Å)
ProT/uni03B1
Nupr1
Complex
STARLING SAXS
10–110–2
I(q)I(q)I(q)
SAXS scattering curve
STARLING scattering
q (Å–1)
0 40 80 120
0
40
80
120
4 –4
TRPV4 residue
TRPV4 residue
Mutant distance – wild-type distance (Å)
PBS
ADPEDPRDAGDVLGDDSFPLSSLANLFEVE
DTPSPAEPSRGPPGAVDGKQNLRMKFHGAF
RKGPPKPMELLESTIYESSVVPAPKKAPMD
SLFDYGTYRQHPSENKRWRRRVVEKPVAGT
KGPAPNPPPILKV
a c f j
kg
i
h
d
e
b
l n o p
m
40
30
20
10
1005025 200
Protein length (residues)
Rg (Å)
Microprotein IDRs (1,672)
TRPV4
Starting Design
Target Target
+8 (Å)–8 (Å)
Ensemble – random coil
Target
Starting
Design
min(target, starting) Synthetic
sequence
IDR11–200 IDR2201-361
Myc residue
40 120 200 280
25
50
75
Theory
CTD Rg = 3.02N0.51
SAXS
 All-atom sims.
STARLING
Number of residues
Rg (Å)
20 40 60 80 100
CSP Contacts
NMR
STARLING
Nupr1
ProT/uni03B1
Complex
SAXS scattering curve
STARLING scattering
0 20
0
20
0 25 50
0
20
40
60
0 25 50
0
20
40
60
ETKKSKRGRKRKMRSKKEDSSDSENAEPDLDDNEDEEEPA
GSGSGSGSGSGSGSGSGSGSGSGSGSGSGSGSGSGSGSGS
GTGVELEEDEDQLEEGIAGHTSKKSTRRIRKGRKSHRKRV
50 100
50
75
Rh (Å)
(prediction)
Rh (live cell with HaloTag)
r2 = 1.0
26 52
78
104
Residue number
<1 s
n = heptad repeats
10–110–2
q (Å–1)
NTD IDR in isolation
I(q)
25 50
Rg
P(Rg)
Fig. 4 | Biophysical characterization and design applications with STARLING. 
a, The transcription factor Myc is largely disordered. b , STARLING-derived 
Myc1–361  ensembles identify distinct subregions that drive attractive and 
repulsive interactions. The darker colours are closer together, and the lighter 
colours are further apart. c , The RNA polymerase II CTD consists of a series of 
heptad repeats. d , STARLING ensembles show excellent agreement with SAXS 
and all-atom simulations (sims.), enabling polymer theory to describe CTD 
dimensions with a simple analytical expression. e , Comparison of predicted 
hydrodynamic radii ( Rh) values based on STARLING-derived polymer scaling 
behaviour (Extended Data Fig. 6g) and R h values from freely diffusing CTD-only 
constructs measured in nuclei. f , Histone H1.0 and ProTα form a high-affinity 
complex together. The H1.0 CTD and ProTα were tethered together by an inert 
(GS)80 linker. g, The resulting ensemble shows robust H1.0–ProTα interaction. 
h, The H1.0 CTD and ProTα contract in the complex versus in isolation.  
i, Comparison of per-residue ProTα–H1.0 CTD contacts and NMR-derived 
chemical shift perturbations (CSPs) shows excellent agreement. Blue 
highlighting identifies core binding subregion. j, Nupr1 and ProTα form a 
complex; we used a shorter (GS)5 linker to enable comparison to SAXS data.  
k, STARLING-derived ensembles show excellent agreement with Nupr1, ProTα 
and the Nupr1–ProTα complex. l, The TRPV4 channel has a large N-terminal  
IDR that contains a basic phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate-binding site 
(PBS). NTD, N-terminal domain. m , STARLING-derived ensembles show good 
agreement with SAXS data. n , Difference distance map showing the difference 
in inter-residue distance between the mutant sequence minus the wild-type 
sequence. Orange colours indicate that distances are further apart in the 
mutant while blue means that residues are closer together in the mutant than in 
the wild type. The PBS engages in long-range interactions with a distal acidic 
region, and mutation of positively charged residues reduces these interactions, 
in good agreement with extant experimental work. o , STARLING enables 
systematic prediction of disordered microprotein ensembles. p , Using an 
optimized latent-space design approach, STARLING enables rapid sequence 
design to match a desired conformational ensemble. See also Extended Data 
Fig. 7d–m.

===== PAGE 8 =====
Nature | Vol 652 | 2 April 2026 | 247
reported41. Both proteins contract in the complex (Fig. 4h), consist-
ent with experimental data and theory. Moreover, the specific residues 
in ProT α identified by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)-derived 
chemical shift perturbations match those residues from the STARLING 
complex ensemble that drive intermolecular interactions (Fig. 4i). We 
also investigated the complex between ProT α and the fully disordered 
82-residue protein Nupr1 (ref. 42) (Fig. 4j). Here again, we saw agree-
ment with SAXS data for the individual proteins and, using a shorter GS 
linker, for the disordered bimolecular complex (Fig. 4k). These results 
indicate that STARLING-derived binary complex ensembles can capture 
elements of IDR–IDR interaction ensembles.
Although our analyses thus far have primarily focused on ensemble 
differences between very different sequences, we wondered whether 
STARLING could interpret relatively small amino acid changes. The 
N-terminal IDR from the transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 
(TRPV4) ion channel has a long-range regulatory interaction between 
a basic phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate-binding site and an 
acidic cluster43 (Fig. 4l). STARLING-derived ensembles of this region 
show good agreement with SAXS data (Fig. 4m). Moreover, compar-
ing the differences in intramolecular distances between the wild type 
and a KRWRR-to-AAWAA mutant that reduces long-range interactions 
in vitro yields a commensurate reduction in long-range interactions in 
STARLING ensembles (Fig. 4n). These illustrate how STARLING can be 
used to understand biophysical mechanisms of functional regulation 
in proteins, even with relatively subtle changes in sequence.
We were also interested in investigating the application of STAR-
LING to larger-scale ensemble prediction. Recent work has charac-
terized a large set of microproteins — non-canonical open reading 
frames typically under 100 amino acids in size — using a combination 
of mass spectrometry and Ribo-seq-based approaches44. Although 
these microproteins are highly disordered, they possess distinct amino 
acid sequence biases from ‘canonical’ open reading frame-derived 
IDRs (Extended Data Fig. 7a–c and Supplementary Table 6). From 
1,785 microproteins in these data, we identified 1,672 IDRs and pre-
dicted ensembles for all of them. Although most short IDRs are rela-
tively expanded, many had extensive intramolecular contacts driven 
primarily between aromatic and arginine residues (Fig.  4o). These 
results suggest that even short-disordered proteins can possess 
sequence-encoded conformational biases.
Beyond accurate, rapid ensemble prediction, STARLING addresses 
the inverse-design problem: generating sequences whose conforma-
tional ensembles match a chosen target. T o do this, we exploited the 
ensemble-aware sequence representations of the model by imple -
menting a latent-alignment objective that maximizes cosine similarity 
between target and candidate learned sequence representations using 
the sequence optimization framework in GOOSE (see Methods)26. This 
allowed us to quickly design in this ensemble-aware latent space, rather 
than generating ensembles in 3D, enabling the rapid optimization of 
bespoke disordered sequences with prescribed ensemble properties.
As a proof of concept, we used STARLING in conjunction with our 
IDR design framework, GOOSE to design 100 sequences targeting a 
short IDR from the protein CTCF (CTCF590–629 ; UniProt ID: P49711)26. 
Starting from length-matched GS sequences, generation averaged 
0.7 s per sequence with high structural accuracy (mean absolute error 
of 0.94 Å; average Hamming distance of 35; Extended Data Fig. 7d). Fur-
thermore, we found that ensemble-matching designs can be generated 
within tens of seconds, even for long sequences (Extended Data Fig. 7e–
m and Supplementary Fig. 4). These results, alongside performance 
tests on longer sequences, demonstrate that STARLING enables rapid, 
systematic design of IDRs with specific conformational properties.
Predictions up until this point have focused on ensemble generation 
at 150 mM ionic strength. However, the STARLING sequence encoder 
was explicitly conditioned on ionic strength (see Methods). Conse-
quently, STARLING can also generate ensembles at ionic strengths 
between 20 mM and 300 mM (Fig. 5a).
T o assess how well STARLING captures ionic-strength dependence — 
as defined by the underlying Mpipi-GG model — we analysed 30 strong 
polyampholytic sequences consisting solely of lysine and glutamate 
with distinct charge patterning (‘Das–Pappu sequences’)45. Figure 5b 
shows the end-to-end distance distributions from STARLING and 
Mpipi-GG at the three ionic strengths used during training, showing 
excellent agreement as measured by both the H and the KS statistic 
(note that these are not fitted to one another). This trend holds across 
the Das–Pappu sequence variants (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b).
We next asked whether our ionic-strength model, conditioned with 
three anchor points (ionic strength of 20 mM, 150 mM and 300 mM), 
would generalize to new ionic strengths not seen in training. We evalu-
ated 16 ionic strengths spanning 20–300 mM (13 never seen in train-
ing) and analysed the mean end-to-end distance of each ensemble. 
STARLING interpolates smoothly between the three training ionic 
strengths and reproduces Mpipi-GG means with high concordance 
(Pearson r = 0.98; Spearman ρ  = 0.97; Fig. 5c). Beyond just global 
dimensions, normalized distance maps compared between ensem-
bles generated via STARLING and Mpipi-GG simulations revealed that 
STARLING accurately learns the ionic-strength-dependent changes in 
the underlying conformational distributions of inter-residue distances 
(Fig. 5d and Extended Data Fig. 8c). Furthermore, STARLING can quali-
tatively reproduce ionic-strength dependence of the ProT α–H1.0 CTD 
interaction41 (Extended Data Fig. 8d–f). T ogether, these results sug -
gest STARLING can be used to investigate solution-dependent IDR 
interactions using a limited number of anchor points and interpolating 
between them.
Although STARLING aligns with Mpipi-GG and experimental data, 
it is not a substitute for rigorous biophysical measurements. Instead, 
experiments can complement STARLING by providing restraints 
to refine and integrate into IDR ensembles via two routes. The first 
route uses guidance during ensemble generation to push conformers 
towards target observables (see Methods; Extended Data Fig. 9a–c 
and Supplementary Fig. 5), an approach well-suited for generating 
ensembles far from the unbiased distribution (for example, cyclic pep-
tides), although guided ensembles likely deviate from the canonical 
ensemble. The second route uses Bayesian maximum entropy (BME) 
reweighting — reimplemented natively within STARLING — to reweight 
ensembles to match experimental observables15. BME treats the STAR-
LING ensemble as the prior and incorporates data (for example, SAXS 
and smFRET) through a likelihood-based restraint with uncertainties, 
yielding ensembles that better match experiment (Fig. 5e). As a proof of 
concept, we used BME to reweight four of the ensembles for sequences 
measured by Holla et al.34, treating the experimental end-to-end dis-
tance as a restraint in the BME objective. The resulting ensembles not 
only improve agreement with end-to-end distance but also agreement 
with the SAXS-derived Rg (Fig. 5f). These results suggest that STARLING 
provides a powerful and easy-to-use platform for integrative modelling 
of experimental data of IDRs.
Finally, beyond the strict generation of ensembles, a novel application 
enabled by the unique architecture of STARLING is the ability to perform 
fast, large-scale disordered-protein biophysical ensemble-similarity 
search directly from sequence (Fig. 5g). By encoding sequences into 
a conformationally aware latent space using the sequence encoder 
(Extended Data Fig. 2d), search can be performed within this embedded 
space, enabling the identification of conformationally similar IDRs.
As a proof of principle, we created a database of all predicted IDRs 
in UniRef50 with fewer than 380 residues (approximately 35 million 
sequences). We then created STARLING ensemble-aware embeddings 
for each of these sequences, implementing a methodology for rapid, 
large-scale approximate nearest-neighbour search (see Methods). 
We tested this approach by querying the protein SERF (UniProt ID: 
O75920) against this database46 (Fig. 5g). Next, we extracted the candi-
date with the most similar and least similar vector embeddings and built 
ensemble-averaged distance maps for each construct. Normalizing 

===== PAGE 9 =====
248 | Nature | Vol 652 | 2 April 2026
Article
each of these candidates by the query protein SERF reveals that the most 
similar length-matched candidate has a highly similar averaged pairwise 
distance map (Fig. 5h). By contrast, the least similar length-matched 
candidate has stark differences with subregions that are both overly 
compact and overly expanded. T ogether, the STARLING sequence 
encoder enables IDR sequences to be represented in a high-dimensional 
conformationally aware space, with a broad range of potential applica-
tions, from design (Fig. 4p) to search (Fig. 5g,h) to the development of 
new protein representations that combine IDR-specific embeddings 
with general protein language embeddings.
Overall, these vignettes demonstrate the versatile range of applica-
tions that STARLING enables. Of note, the speed and ease with which 
STARLING generates ensembles mean that these investigations can be 
accomplished in hours or even minutes.
Discussion and conclusion
STARLING is a generative model that can produce coarse-grained IDR 
ensembles directly from protein sequences in seconds. Despite sev-
eral caveats and limitations, one of the major features of STARLING 
Residue i
Residue j
1 26
Residue i Residue i Residue i Residue i Residue i
1
26
Residue j
1
26
Residue j
1
26
Residue j
1
26
Residue j
1
26
Residue j
20 mM
1 26
100 mM
1 26
150 mM
1 26
200 mM
1 26
300 mM
50 100
Re (Å) Re (Å) Re (Å)
0
0.01
0.02
P(Re)
0
0.01
0.02
P(Re)
0
0.01
0.02
P(Re)
50 100 50 100
20 mM
H: 0.04
D: 0.03
150 mM
H: 0.04
D: 0.02
300 mM
H: 0.05
D: 0.04
20 40 60
20
40
60 r = 0.98
 = 0.97
50
100
150
200
250
300
Ionic strengt h (mM)
STARLING Re (Å)
Mpipi-GG Re (Å) 
STARLING distribution Mpipi-GG distribution
Mpipi-GGMpipi-GG Mpipi-GG Mpipi-GG
STARLINGSTARLING STARLING STARLING STARLINGSTARLINGSTARLING STARLING STARLING STARLING
Mpipi-GG
Normalized distance
__
__ ++
++
_ ___
++++
a
d
e
g h
f
b c
Ionic strength (mM)
Experimental data 
(e.g., SAXS/FRET)
+
Observable
Probability
Experiment
Initial
ensemble
Reweighted
ensemble
+ +++
_
_
_
_
BME reweighting
Reweighting
0
2.5
5.0
Mean absolute 
error vs exp. (Å)
sNh+dCh– dTRBP sNrich
Most similar candidate
(Hamming distance: 64)
Query
... HKDTTNQAAN
ANHDETEHRG ... RRKQNGEQDA
GKQTSHKSGK ... NATEHQEGRE
DQAKTTDKNK ... TSQAANDDTG
SGSHHANEHE ... HQKRNRSRKK
...
...
...
Candidate database 
(UniRef50; 35 million IDRs)
Query sequence
Sequence 
encoder
MARGNQRDLA RQKNLKKQKD MAKNQKKSGD PKKR
MESDAEILRQ KQAAADARRE AEKLEKLKAE KTRR
MTIKTLINFS TLKKVNYQNN TKNILITKIK KFTK
TSLFISYQFN DKICTKNKTT INNTKNTTKN TTLF
MKSPPPPYYY HSPPPPVKSP PPPYYYHSPP PPVK
SPPPPYYYNS PPPPVKSPPP PVYIYASPPP PTHY
Initial
Reweight
Re
Initial
Reweight
Rg
Reweight on...
... observe 
0.7
1.0
1.2
Least similar candidate
(Hamming distance: 64)
Candidate:query
0.7 1.4
MARGNQRDLA 
Ensemble similarity
Rank
...
...
Least similar
Most similar
Ranked
candidatesCandidates
Query Query
Embedded sequences
STARLING
STARLING
Fig. 5 | STARLING enables solution-dependent ensemble generation, 
Bayesian reweighting and ensemble-aware embedding for search.  
a, Schematic representation of sequence-dependent changes in conformational 
behaviour in response to changes in ionic strength for a blocky polyampholytic 
sequence. b, STARLING-derived ionic-strength-dependent R e distributions for 
a highly charged, ionic-strength-responsive sequence. Mpipi-GG simulations 
shown as a kernel density estimate plot. In each subpanel, we show H and the KS 
statistic to quantify the difference between distributions and the effect size of 
the difference. A KS statistic of 0.03 means the CDFs of the two distributions 
differ by at most 3%. c, Re correlation between the STARLING and Mpipi-GG 
simulations performed at various ionic strengths for the highly charged Das–
Pappu sequences. Despite being trained only at three different ionic strengths, 
STARLING can interpolate across ionic strengths unseen during training.  
d, AFRC-normalized average inter-residue distance maps for STARLING (upper) 
compared with Mpipi-GG simulations (lower) across five different ionic strengths. 
e, Schematic representation of incorporating experimental data into STARLING 
for integrative biophysical modelling. f , Reweighting based on single-molecule 
Förster resonance energy transfer (smFRET) data for Re improves agreement 
with SAXS data ( Rg), highlighting how ensemble reweighting through one 
modality can improve agreement with others. Exp., experiment. g , Schematic 
representation of the ensemble-aware latent embedding of STARLING as used 
for sequence search. h , Heatmap of the ratio (candidate:query) of average 
inter-residue distance maps for the fully disordered query protein SERF 
Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  (UniProt ID: Q3E7B7 ). The upper triangle shows the 
top-ranked candidate; the lower triangle shows the lowest-ranked candidate, 
where candidates were ranked by cosine similarity of their embedding maps to 
the query SERF after scanning a database of IDRs from UniRef50. The colours 
indicate deviation from SERF: white ≈ 1.0 (similar), purple < 1.0 (more compact) 
and orange > 1.0 (more expanded). Serendipitously, the most and least similar 
candidates are equidistant from SERF in terms of sequence changes.

===== PAGE 10 =====
Nature | Vol 652 | 2 April 2026 | 249
is that it drastically reduces the barrier to obtaining conformational 
predictions of sequence-dependent IDR behaviour. Although IDRs 
are often ignored or visualized as AlphaFold ‘orange spaghetti’ , 
STARLING makes it straightforwards for anyone to obtain realistic 
coarse-grained ensembles. Rather than ‘the end’ of an investigation 
into IDR sequence-ensemble behaviour, we view STARLING as a begin-
ning, making it straightforwards to develop hypotheses as to how the 
sequence of an IDR may determine its conformational ensemble and/
or how it may influence interactions with other IDRs.
A key feature of STARLING is its ability to generate conformational 
ensembles rather than just predict ensemble-average values. Although 
ensemble average properties (for example, average Rg or average Re) 
can be informative20,21,47, they do not enable a ‘structural’ investigation 
into the determinants of a given behaviour. With a conformational 
ensemble, the specific sets of residues responsible for an observed 
behaviour can be directly identified. Moreover, substantial effort has 
been placed into developing methods to back-calculate experimental 
observables from simulation trajectories to interpret experimental 
data15. STARLING ensembles are amenable to these analyses, allowing 
comparison with a range of experimental results. However, we note 
that all comparisons between STARLING predictions and experimental 
data rely on computational tools to predict observables from protein 
structures which can introduce their own approximations. As such, 
agreement with experiment reflects both STARLING and the accuracy 
of these tools and their assumptions.
Although STARLING generates ensembles in seconds, it has key 
limitations (see also Methods). Because STARLING was trained with 
simulations from a one-bead-per-residue coarse-grained force fields 
that do not include secondary structure, it cannot predict secondary 
structure elements. In addition, it cannot incorporate flanking folded 
domains. However, we view the inability to incorporate folded domains 
as a potential ‘feature’; discrepancies between predictions of isolated 
IDRs and experimental data (where flanking folded domains are pre-
sent) may reveal biophysically meaningful interactions.
STARLING is also poorly poised to capture many environmental effects 
or post-translational modifications. IDRs can act as environmental sen-
sors, with their conformational behaviour and interactions being tuned 
by their local chemical environment (salt, temperature and osmolytes, 
and so on)48. Furthermore, charge regulation can ‘rewrite’ the charge 
state of a protein, up-shifting or down-shifting intrinsic pKa values49. 
Because STARLING was trained using simulations performed under 
‘standard conditions’ (infinite dilution, 298 K), it does not enable explicit 
incorporation of many of these physicochemical modulators. Moreover, 
post-translational modifications and non-canonical amino acids are cur-
rently not accounted for. Looking ahead, generalization to environmen-
tal sensitivity or non-canonical residues remains challenging, in part due 
to limited benchmarking data. Although our ionic strength conditional 
results are encouraging (Supplementary Fig. 6) — at least conceptually, 
see Methods for Debye–Hückel limitations — broader environmental 
response modelling will require expanded training sets and dedicated 
experimental benchmarks to establish reliability (see Methods).
Unlike conventional molecular dynamics, STARLING generates con-
formational ensembles without time-resolved trajectories. Although 
molecular dynamics provides explicit dynamics, it often struggles to 
accrue independent samples for long chains that reconfigure slowly, 
typically requiring advanced kinetic frameworks for robust rate esti-
mates. By contrast, STARLING produces decorrelated samples through 
independent stochastic denoising, maintaining high speed regardless 
of sequence length. Consequently, STARLING avoids many of the chal-
lenges in generating ensembles for longer sequences seen in molecular 
dynamics. Furthermore, we suggest that STARLING-generated con-
formers could be used to seed large numbers of shorter molecular 
dynamics simulations, enabling more reliable kinetic analyses.
Several recent sequence-to-ensemble approaches have emerged, 
beginning with Taneja and Lasker’s two-stage DDPM, which 
established the feasibility of learning these mappings for heteroge-
neous sequences 50. More recently, idpSAM utilized a latent-space 
DDPM trained on all-atom simulations, although its predictive power 
is generally limited to sequences under 60 residues51 (Extended Data 
Fig. 9d). Other methods, such as IDPFold and IDPForge, integrate 
protein language models with experimental or molecular dynamics 
data52,53 (Extended Data Fig. 9e–r and Supplementary Fig. 7). Unlike 
the coarse-grained approach of STARLING, these methods (and oth-
ers) provide all-atom molecular detail and, in some cases, the ability to 
include folded domains, albeit at the expense of runtime performance, 
hardware requirements, and potentially accuracy with respect to global 
dimensions and long-range IDR-mediated interactions 52– 56. Other 
emerging strategies include combining deep learning with Bayesian 
reweighting10,54,57 or predicting Hamiltonians rather than ensembles58. 
Overall, however, these tools often fall short of the balance of accu-
racy, performance and accessibility of STARLING. Furthermore, the 
ability of STARLING to reweight against experimental data (Extended 
Data Fig. 10) and encode and search ensembles offers unique research 
opportunities when integrated with bioinformatics pipelines or protein 
language models.
STARLING enables systematic, library-scale design of IDRs to test 
the ‘ensemble–function relationship’: the hypothesis that IDR func -
tion depends directly on conformational behaviour1,2,26. Historically, 
designing sequences with targeted ensembles was challenging due to 
the astronomical sequence space and the low-throughput nature of 
experimental or computational ensemble characterization. Although 
recent exciting ensemble-based design methods have emerged, they 
are not practical for thousands of sequences 59,60. By providing a 
direct optimization handle within a biophysically meaningful latent 
space, STARLING (integrated with GOOSE) transforms this under -
constrained search into a tractable design problem, allowing for the 
creation of large-scale libraries to test sequence–ensemble–function  
hypotheses26.
Finally, the ensemble-aware embedding of STARLING enables 
sequence search and design based on conformational behaviour 
rather than primary structure. This provides a biophysically grounded 
alternative to BLAST, which often fails with poorly conserved or 
low-complexity IDRs. By facilitating the homology-independent dis-
covery of ‘biophysical look-alikes’ , this approach enables hypothesis 
transfer to uncharacterized regions and identifies natural templates 
for inverse design, even when traditional alignments and composition 
heuristics fail.
In conclusion, we hope STARLING serves the disordered protein com-
munity as a highly accessible tool for biophysical investigation. Unlike 
many deep learning tools, STARLING is designed for ease of use; it can be 
installed via pip and run with a single command. By enabling ‘on-the-fly’ 
predictions on commodity hardware, STARLING fills a unique gap in 
IDR characterization. Although it does not replace existing technolo-
gies, it provides a practical way to explore conformational behaviour 
easily, quickly, accurately and at scale.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summa-
ries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowl-
edgements, peer review information; details of author contributions 
and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability 
are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10141-2.
1. Holehouse, A. S. & Kragelund, B. B. The molecular basis for cellular function of 
intrinsically disordered protein regions. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 25, 187–211 (2024).
2. González-Foutel, N. S. et al. Conformational buffering underlies functional selection in 
intrinsically disordered protein regions. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol 29, 781–790 (2022).
3. Martin, E. W. et al. Valence and patterning of aromatic residues determine the phase 
behavior of prion-like domains. Science 367, 694–699 (2020).
4. Flores, E., Acharya, N., Castañeda, C. A. & Sukenik, S. Single-point mutations in disordered 
proteins: linking sequence, ensemble, and function. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 91, 102987 
(2025).

===== PAGE 11 =====
250 | Nature | Vol 652 | 2 April 2026
Article
5. Ghafouri, H., Tosatto, S. C. E. & Monzon, A. M. Advances in the determination of disordered 
protein ensemble. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 96, 103198 (2026).
6. Das, R. K., Ruff, K. M. & Pappu, R. V. Relating sequence encoded information to form and 
function of intrinsically disordered proteins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 32, 102–112 (2015).
7. Cubuk, J., Stuchell-Brereton, M. D. & Soranno, A. The biophysics of disordered proteins 
from the point of view of single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy. Essays Biochem. 
66, 875–890 (2022).
8. Camacho-Zarco, A. R. et al. NMR provides unique insight into the functional dynamics 
and interactions of intrinsically disordered proteins. Chem. Rev. 122, 9331–9356 (2022).
9. Martin, E. W., Hopkins, J. B. & Mittag, T. Small-angle X-ray scattering experiments of 
monodisperse intrinsically disordered protein samples close to the solubility limit. 
Methods Enzymol. 646, 185–222 (2021).
10. Borthakur, K., Sisk, T. R., Panei, F. P., Bonomi, M. & Robustelli, P. Determining accurate 
conformational ensembles of intrinsically disordered proteins at atomic resolution. 
Nat. Commun. 16, 9036 (2025).
11. Ozenne, V. et al. Flexible-meccano: a tool for the generation of explicit ensemble 
descriptions of intrinsically disordered proteins and their associated experimental 
observables. Bioinformatics 28, 1463–1470 (2012).
12. Bernadó, P., Mylonas, E., Petoukhov, M. V., Blackledge, M. & Svergun, D. I. Structural 
characterization of flexible proteins using small-angle X-ray scattering. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
129, 5656–5664 (2007).
13. Fuertes, G. et al. Decoupling of size and shape fluctuations in heteropolymeric sequences 
reconciles discrepancies in SAXS vs. FRET measurements. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 
E6342–E6351 (2017).
14. Bonomi, M., Heller, G. T., Camilloni, C. & Vendruscolo, M. Principles of protein structural 
ensemble determination. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 42, 106–116 (2017).
15. Bottaro, S., Bengtsen, T. & Lindorff-Larsen, K. Integrating molecular simulation and 
experimental data: a Bayesian/maximum entropy reweighting approach. Methods Mol. 
Biol. 2112, 219–240 (2020).
16. Shea, J.-E., Best, R. B. & Mittal, J. Physics-based computational and theoretical approaches 
to intrinsically disordered proteins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 67, 219–225 (2021).
17. Joseph, J. A. et al. Physics-driven coarse-grained model for biomolecular phase 
separation with near-quantitative accuracy. Nat. Comput. Sci. 1, 732–743 (2021).
18. Tesei, G., Schulze, T. K., Crehuet, R. & Lindorff-Larsen, K. Accurate model of liquid-liquid 
phase behavior of intrinsically disordered proteins from optimization of single-chain 
properties. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2111696118 (2021).
19. Dignon, G. L., Zheng, W., Kim, Y. C., Best, R. B. & Mittal, J. Sequence determinants of 
protein phase behavior from a coarse-grained model. PLoS Comput. Biol. 14, e1005941 
(2018).
20. Lotthammer, J. M., Ginell, G. M., Griffith, D., Emenecker, R. J. & Holehouse, A. S. Direct 
prediction of intrinsically disordered protein conformational properties from sequence. 
Nat. Methods 21, 465–476 (2024).
21. Tesei, G. et al. Conformational ensembles of the human intrinsically disordered proteome. 
Nature 626, 897–904 (2024).
22. Wodak, S. J., Vajda, S., Lensink, M. F., Kozakov, D. & Bates, P. A. Critical assessment of 
methods for predicting the 3D structure of proteins and protein complexes. Annu. Rev. 
Biophys. 52, 183–206 (2023).
23. Ruff, K. M. & Pappu, R. V. AlphaFold and implications for intrinsically disordered proteins. 
J. Mol. Biol. 433, 167208 (2021).
24. Ho, J., Jain, A. & Abbeel, P. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Preprint at http://
arxiv.org/abs/2006.11239 (2020).
25. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P. & Ommer, B. High-resolution image 
synthesis with latent diffusion models. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752 
(2021).
26. Emenecker, R. J., Guadalupe, K., Shamoon, N. M., Sukenik, S. & Holehouse, A. S. 
Sequence-ensemble-function relationships for disordered proteins in live cells. Preprint 
at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.10.29.564547 (2023).
27. Kingma, D. P. & Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational bayes. Preprint at http://arxiv.org/
abs/1312.6114v11 (2013).
28. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S. & Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. Preprint 
at http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385 (2015).
29. Alston, J. J., Ginell, G. M., Soranno, A. & Holehouse, A. S. The analytical flory random coil 
is a simple-to-use reference model for unfolded and disordered proteins. J. Phys. Chem. B 
127, 4746–4760 (2023).
30. Nugnes, M. V. et al. DisProt in 2026: enhancing intrinsically disordered proteins accessibility, 
deposition, and annotation. Nucleic Acids Res. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaf1175 
(2025).
31. Marsh, J. A. & Forman-Kay, J. D. Sequence determinants of compaction in intrinsically 
disordered proteins. Biophys. J. 98, 2383–2390 (2010).
32. Müller-Späth, S. et al. From the cover: charge interactions can dominate the dimensions 
of intrinsically disordered proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 14609–14614 (2010).
33. Schneidman-Duhovny, D., Hammel, M., Tainer, J. A. & Sali, A. Accurate SAXS profile 
computation and its assessment by contrast variation experiments. Biophys. J. 105, 
962–974 (2013).
34. Holla, A. et al. Identifying sequence effects on chain dimensions of disordered proteins 
by integrating experiments and simulations. JACS Au 4, 4729–4743 (2024).
35. Hellenkamp, B. et al. Precision and accuracy of single-molecule FRET measurements — a 
multi-laboratory benchmark study. Nat. Methods 15, 669–676 (2018).
36. Dhanasekaran, R. et al. The MYC oncogene — the grand orchestrator of cancer growth 
and immune evasion. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 19, 23–36 (2022).
37. Eick, D. & Geyer, M. The RNA polymerase II carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) code. Chem. 
Rev. 113, 8456–8490 (2013).
38. Gibbs, E. B. et al. Phosphorylation induces sequence-specific conformational switches in 
the RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain. Nat. Commun. 8, 15233 (2017).
39. Mao, A. H., Lyle, N. & Pappu, R. V. Describing sequence–ensemble relationships for 
intrinsically disordered proteins. Biochem. J. 449, 307–318 (2013).
40. Ling, Y. H. et al. Disordered C-terminal domain drives spatiotemporal confinement of 
RNAPII to enhance search for chromatin targets. Nat. Cell Biol. 26, 581–592 (2024).
41. Borgia, A. et al. Extreme disorder in an ultrahigh-affinity protein complex. Nature 555, 
61–66 (2018).
42. Neira, J. L. et al. Dynamics of the intrinsically disordered protein NUPR1 in isolation and in 
its fuzzy complexes with DNA and prothymosin α. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Proteins Proteom. 
1867, 140252 (2019).
43. Goretzki, B. et al. Crosstalk between regulatory elements in disordered TRPV4 N-terminus 
modulates lipid-dependent channel activity. Nat. Commun. 14, 4165 (2023).
44. Deutsch, E. W. et al. High-quality peptide evidence for annotating non-canonical  
open reading frames as human proteins. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/ 
2024.09.09.612016 (2024).
45. Das, R. K. & Pappu, R. V. Conformations of intrinsically disordered proteins are influenced 
by linear sequence distributions of oppositely charged residues. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
110, 13392–13397 (2013).
46. Mitra, R. et al. Molecular insights into the interaction between a disordered protein and a 
folded RNA. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 121, e2409139121 (2024).
47. Chao, T.-H., Rekhi, S., Mittal, J. & Tabor, D. P. Data-driven models for predicting intrinsically 
disordered protein polymer physics directly from composition or sequence. Mol. Syst. 
Des. Eng. 8, 1146–1155 (2023).
48. Moses, D., Ginell, G. M., Holehouse, A. S. & Sukenik, S. Intrinsically disordered regions are 
poised to act as sensors of cellular chemistry. Trends Biochem. Sci. 48, 1019–1034 (2023).
49. Fossat, M. J. & Pappu, R. V. Q-canonical Monte Carlo sampling for modeling the linkage 
between charge regulation and conformational equilibria of peptides. J. Phys. Chem. B 
123, 6952–6967 (2019).
50. Taneja, I. & Lasker, K. Machine-learning-based methods to generate conformational 
ensembles of disordered proteins. Biophys. J. 123, 101–113 (2024).
51. Janson, G. & Feig, M. Transferable deep generative modeling of intrinsically disordered 
protein conformations. PLoS Comput. Biol. 20, e1012144 (2024).
52. Zhu, J. et al. Accurate generation of conformational ensembles for intrinsically disordered 
proteins with IDPFold. Adv. Sci. https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202511636 (2025).
53. Zhang, O., Liu, Z. H., Forman-Kay, J. D. & Head-Gordon, T. Deep learning of proteins with 
local and global regions of disorder. Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/2502.11326 (2025).
54. Schnapka, V., Morozova, T., Sen, S. & Bonomi, M. Atomic resolution ensembles of 
intrinsically disordered and multi-domain proteins with Alphafold. Preprint at bioRxiv 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.18.660298 (2025).
55. Invernizzi, M. et al. Advancing protein ensemble predictions across the order-disorder 
continuum. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.18.680935 (2025).
56. Lewis, S. et al. Scalable emulation of protein equilibrium ensembles with generative deep 
learning. Science 389, eadv9817 (2025).
57. Brotzakis, Z. F., Zhang, S., Murtada, M. H. & Vendruscolo, M. AlphaFold prediction of 
structural ensembles of disordered proteins. Nat. Commun. 16, 1632 (2025).
58. Houston, L., Phillips, M., Torres, A., Gaalswyk, K. & Ghosh, K. Physics-based machine 
learning trains Hamiltonians and decodes the sequence-conformation relation in the 
disordered proteome. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 20, 10266–10274 (2024).
59. Pesce, F. et al. Design of intrinsically disordered protein variants with diverse structural 
properties. Sci. Adv. 10, eadm9926 (2024).
60. Krueger, R. K., Brenner, M. P. & Shrinivas, K. Generalized design of sequence-ensemble- 
function relationships for intrinsically disordered proteins. Nat. Comput. Sci. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/s43588-025-00881-y (2025).
61. Steinegger, M. et al. MMseqs2: ultra fast and sensitive search and clustering suite. GitHub 
https://github.com/soedinglab/MMseqs2 (2025).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which 
permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in 
any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the 
licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material 
derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your 
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, 
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2026

===== PAGE 12 =====
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Port-
folio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The code and data associated with the figures in this article are avail-
able on GitHub (https://github.com/holehouse-lab/supportingdata/
tree/master/2026/starling_2026). The Zenodo repository for UniRef50 
IDR sequence embeddings is available 62 (https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.17342150). Any data missing are available from the correspond-
ing author.
Code availability
STARLING is fully open source and available on GitHub (https://github.
com/idptools/starling/). The documentation for STARLING is available 
(https://idptools-starling.readthedocs.io). STARLING is also provided 
as a Colab notebook (https://github.com/idptools/idpcolab/blob/
main/STARLING/STARLING_demo.ipynb).
 
62. Holehouse, A., Lotthammer, J. & Novak, B. STARLING IDR sequence search index  
and metadata (v1.0.0) [data set]. Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17342150 
(2025).
63. Riback, J. A. et al. Innovative scattering analysis shows that hydrophobic disordered 
proteins are expanded in water. Science 358, 238–241 (2017).
64. Kohn, J. E. et al. Random-coil behavior and the dimensions of chemically unfolded 
proteins. Proc Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 12491–12496 (2004).
Acknowledgements We thank J. Pelham, R. Somjee, B. Portz, S. Hoffman-Weitsman and  
F. Beinart for their comments on the manuscript; U. Hellmich for giving an exceptional talk that 
inspired our investigation of the TRPV4 IDR; our many colleagues for sharing and depositing 
raw experimental data (notably, SAXS data on SASDB), which has greatly facilitated comparison 
with experimental data; J. Sohn, S. Showalter, E. Martin, B. Schuler, M. Grazia Ortore and  
M. Blackledge for sharing raw SAXS scattering data; B. Kragelund and F. Stryhn Buus for sharing 
chemical shift data for the ProTα–H1.0 complex; the Research Infrastructure Services group at 
Washington University in St. Louis for providing computational resources and services 
required for this work; D. Stanzione for his relentless support of US high-performance scientific 
computing; L. Koesterke for support on Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC)  
VISTA; and M. Turke and C. McCornack for the bird pictures. We are grateful to the Advanced 
Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem: Services & Support program and resources, 
which is supported by US National Science Foundation (NSF) grants #2138259, #2138286, 
#2138307, #2137603 and #2138296; DeltaAI, which is supported by the US NSF (award OAC 
2320345) and the State of Illinois; and the Delta advanced computing and data resource, 
which is supported by the NSF (award OAC 2005572) and the State of Illinois. We are indebted 
to the TACC administrators and staff. This work was funded by the US NSF through grant 
2338129 (CAREER) to ASH and the US National Institutes of Health through CA290639 (DP2) to 
A.S.H. J.M.L. was supported by the NSF via grant number DGE-2139839 and by the Frontera 
Computational Sciences Fellowship.
Author contributions B.N., J.M.L. and A.S.H. conceptualized the study. B.N. and J.M.L. 
designed the methodology. B.N., J.M.L., R.J.E. and A.S.H. provided software and performed 
validation, formal analysis and the investigation. J.M.L. and A.S.H. provided resources and 
acquired funding. B.N., J.M.L. and A.S.H. curated the data. B.N., J.M.L., R.J.E. and A.S.H. 
performed visualization and wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests A.S.H. is on the scientific advisory board for Prose Foods. All other 
authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-026-10141-2.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Alex S. Holehouse.
Peer review information Nature thanks Gregory Bowman and the other, anonymous, 
reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are 
available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.

===== PAGE 13 =====
Article
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Sequences used in STARLING training, test, and 
validation.  a, Our dataset of 70,563 consists of both natural sequences 
(N = 20,349) and synthetic sequences designed by varying sequence features 
known to affect IDR ensembles (N = 50,214). b, The sequences were clustered 
and split into train (N = 49,423), validation (N = 10,703), and test (N = 10,437) 
sets while maintaining the distribution of sequence lengths across the splits 
consistent (right). c , Residues used for STARLING training, test, and validation, 
represented in terms of aliphatic vs. polar content. d , Residues used for 
STARLING training, test, and validation, represented in terms of net charge vs. 
hydrophobicity. e, Residues used for STARLING training, test, and validation, 
represented in terms of kappa (charge patterning) vs. fraction of charged 
residues. f, Residues used for STARLING training, test, and validation, 
represented in terms of aromatic vs. positively charged residues. g , Overall 
sequence complexity as a function of amino acid content. We note that the data 
in panels C-G mirror our prior quantification of sequences 20, albeit with  
an expanded dataset. h , Histogram of the length distribution of naturally 
occurring IDRs across 12 model organisms. i , A cumulative density function of 
the length distribution is presented in a . 94% of the IDRs across common model 
organisms fall between 0 and 384 residues (the length cutoff of STARLING).

===== PAGE 14 =====
Extended Data Fig. 2 | See next page for caption.

===== PAGE 15 =====
Article
Extended Data Fig. 2 | VAE overview, performance, and overall detailed 
model architecture. a, Schematic representation of the variational autoencoder 
(VAE). The input to our variational autoencoder is a collection of 2D inter-residue 
distance maps that undergo feature extraction and spatial compression 
through a ResNet18 encoder, which learns the μ and σ parameters of a normal 
distribution that parameterizes the latent features. The VAE is trained using an 
evidence-based lower bound (ELBO) loss that comprises a reconstruction term 
and a Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence term. b , The variational autoencoder 
(VAE) is evaluated on a held-out test set of distance maps (N = 2,422,839). The 
VAE encoder spatially compresses these distance maps, which the VAE decoder 
then reconstructs from their compressed representations. The root-mean-
square error (RMSE) is computed between the input and output distance maps. 
The trained VAE shows a low mean RMSE across the upper triangle of each 
distance map (1.16 Å). c, Accurate bond reconstruction is essential for generating 
physically realistic conformations, and our model achieves a very low mean 
RMSE (0.18 Å). d, Extended schematic of the STARLING discrete-time denoising 
diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM). The model begins with 2D Gaussian 
noise (1 channel, 24×24 latent space) and is projected to 64 channels via a 
convolutional upsampling layer. Spatial features are then patchified into 3×3 
regions (8 total) and passed through a 12-layer vision transformer (ViT). The ViT 
output is stitched back (depatchified) and reduced back to 1 channel by a 
convolutional downsampling layer. To generate sequence-specific distance 
maps, the ViT is conditioned on sequence features extracted by a transformer-
based encoder. The input sequence is ordinally encoded, embedded into  
high-dimensional vectors, followed by the addition of sinusoidal positional 
embeddings, and processed by a 12-layer transformer. Ionic strength 
information is additionally incorporated through cross-attention, yielding 
environment-specific sequence features that are fed into the denoising module’s 
cross-attention layers. e , Model overview as set up during training. f , Model 
overview as used for inference.

===== PAGE 16 =====
Extended Data Fig. 3 | Starling performance comparisons. a,b, STARLING 
benchmarking on different types of hardware in linear ( a) and log (b) space. 
Runtime depends linearly on the number of conformers (although sequence 
length has almost no impact on runtime). Tested here using a 140-residue 
sequence. On GPUs and Apple Silicon (facilitated by CUDA and MPS, respectively), 
STARLING is highly performant, offering ensembles sufficient for detailed 
biophysical investigation in 10-15 s (GPU) or 30-60 s (MPS). The specific 
hardware tested here includes the Nvidia A4000 (GPU), MacBook Pro M3  
Max CPU (MPS), and Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4210 R CPU @ 2.40 GHz (CPU). We 
note that even on a five-year bottom-of-the-line GPU (GTX-1660 from 2019), 
ensemble generation takes ~50 s for 400 conformers. c , Number of conformers 
generated per second on different hardware types. The specific hardware 
tested here includes the Nvidia A4000 (GPU), MacBook Pro M3 Max CPU (MPS), 
and Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4210 R CPU @ 2.40 GHz (CPU). d , STARLING 
ensemble predictions exhibit almost no runtime or memory scaling with 
respect to sequence length. On a GPU, generating 400 confomers takes ~10 s 
for a 50-residue IDR and ~14 s for a 350-residue IDR. e, STARLING enables users 
to select a batch size for concurrent ensemble prediction. A larger batch size 
requires more GPU-accessible memory. However, we have implemented 
STARLING in a manner that increasing the batch size does not materially affect 
the overall per-conformer prediction time. This means even GPUs with modest 
memory resources can work with STARLING-based predictions by selecting a 
reduced batch size.

===== PAGE 17 =====
Article
Extended Data Fig. 4 | See next page for caption.

===== PAGE 18 =====
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Accuracy and convergence of STARLING compared 
to Mpipi-GG simulations.  a, Comparison of STARLING-derived average end-
to-end distance (R e values) with those from Mpipi-GG (simulations) from a set 
of ~3,000 unseen sequences at an ionic strength of 20 mM. b, Comparison of 
STARLING-derived R e values with those from Mpipi-GG (simulations) from a set 
of ~3,000 unseen sequences at an ionic strength of 300 mM. c – f, Convergence 
of the radius of gyration (R g) as a function of ensemble size for IDRs of varying 
lengths (50, 150, 250, and 350 residues). Dashed lines represent Mpipi-GG 
convergence, solid lines correspond to STARLING convergence, and the shaded 
area indicates the ensemble-averaged R g from long Mpipi-GG simulations. 
STARLING-derived R g values converge within the first 800 conformers, 
exhibiting minimal error compared to Mpipi-GG ensembles. Based on this 
analysis, we selected 800 STARLING conformers for R g prediction comparisons 
in all benchmarking used here. g , Convergence plot depicting the relationship 
between Hellinger distance ( H), the number of conformations sampled from 
STARLING, and the number of denoising steps for various an IDR of length 350. 
The Hellinger distance quantifies the similarity between two distributions, 
where a value of zero indicates identical distributions and a value of one signifies 
no overlap. The Hellinger distance decreases as the number of conformations 
and denoising steps increase, with optimal STARLING performance observed 
at 1000 conformers and 30 denoising steps. h , Convergence of short-range and 
long-range distance distributions as a function of ensemble size. A 10 μ s Mpipi-
GG simulation of a 250-residue disordered protein was split into two 5 μ s 
segments, with one serving as the reference and the other for comparison.  
A 2,500-conformer STARLING ensemble was also compared to the reference 
segment. Panels show convergence of STARLING and Mpipi-GG distance 
distributions relative to the reference for short-range residue pair 1–10, medium- 
range residue pair 1–50, long-range residue pair 1–100, and the end-to-end 
distance (residue pair 1–250). Error bars represent bootstrap-estimated 
standard deviations. Insets display the full distance distributions, along with 
Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistics for STARLING and Mpipi-GG (legend: blue, 
STARLING; orange, Mpipi-GG; black dashed line, reference). i , Convergence  
of radius-of-gyration from short to long sequence lengths. A 10 μ s Mpipi-GG 
simulation of a disordered protein was split into two 5 μ s segments, with one 
serving as the reference and the other for comparison. A 2,500-conformer 
STARLING ensemble was also compared to the reference segment. Panels show 
convergence of STARLING and Mpipi-GG radii-of-gyration distributions relative 
to the reference for a 50-residue-long disordered protein, a 150-residue-long 
disordered protein, a 250-residue-long disordered protein, and a 350-residue-
long disordered protein. Error bars represent bootstrap-estimated standard 
deviations. Insets display the complete radii-of-gyration distributions, along 
with Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistics for STARLING and Mpipi-GG (legend: 
blue, STARLING; orange, Mpipi-GG; black dashed line, reference). j, Comparison 
of STARLING-derived average radii of gyration (R g values) for length-matched 
sequences with a broad range of chemistries for those from Mpipi-GG 
(simulations) from a set of 137 unseen sequences. This is done to verify that 
STARLING has learned real sequence chemistry, not just that longer sequences 
are bigger. k, Comparison of STARLING-derived average radii of gyration (R e 
values) for length-matched sequences with a broad range of chemistries for 
those from Mpipi-GG (simulations) from a set of 137 unseen sequences. This is 
done to verify that STARLING has learned real sequence chemistry, not just that 
longer sequences are bigger.

===== PAGE 19 =====
Article
Extended Data Fig. 5 | See next page for caption.

===== PAGE 20 =====
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Benchmarking STARLING vs. other methods, and 
assessment of DisProt ensembles.  Comparison of experimental R g values 
obtained from 133 different experimental datasets with various state-of-the-
art tools for ensemble prediction ( a) STARLING (this work), (b) Mpipi-GG, 
coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations, ( c) CALVADOS2, coarse-
grained molecular dynamics simulations, ( d) ALBATROSS, a deep-learning-
based predictor that can only predict average ensemble values, ( e) The 
Analytical Random Flory Coil (AFRC), a limiting null model that considers IDPs 
as Gaussian-like chains with no interactions between residues. We include this 
because it represents the true “lower bound” for what a model should achieve 
in terms of accuracy and RMSE. f, idpGAN, a Generative Adversarial Network for 
predicting ensembles from the sequence. g , We also compared Rg predictions 
on GPU vs. MPS implementations for completeness. This revealed 1:1 agreement 
that matched the RMSE and correlation obtained when the same dataset was 
analysed twice on the same hardware ( h). i, Analysis of sequences from DisProt 
– a database of experimentally verified disordered regions – based on STARLING 
ensembles (sequences <380 residues). All ensembles contain 400 conformers, 
and the full DisProt was ~15 h on a desktop computer with an NVIDIA A4000 
GPU (i.e., 3-4 proteins per minute). Fitting ensemble dimensions vs. length 
reveals an apparent scaling exponent of 0.56, indicating these IDRs are 
relatively expanded. However, we note an unavoidable acquisition bias in 
experimentally characterized IDRs, meaning that highly soluble (and hence 
more expanded, with fewer intra- and intermolecular interactions) proteins are 
preferred for biophysical characterization because they do not aggregate/crash 
out of solution, and many techniques used to characterize IDPs (SAXS, NMR, 
etc.) require high protein concentrations. We also note that we underestimate 
the contributions of aliphatic hydrophobes in driving intramolecular interactions, 
as well as the effects of local helicity and the long-range consequences of 
intramolecular helix interactions. Finally, given that IDRs are heteropolymers, 
average scaling behavior, by definition, masks both attractive and repulsive 
intramolecular interactions. As such, we strongly caution against interpreting 
a value of 0.56 as indicating that all IDRs are highly expanded. j , Analysis of 
sequences in the most compact 10% of IDRs identified aromatic residues as 
being over-represented here, in line with prior work. k , An analogous analysis of 
sequences in the top 10% of expanded IDRs also reveals that negatively charged 
residues and proline are enriched in sequences that drive expansion, again in 
agreement with prior work.

===== PAGE 21 =====
Article
Extended Data Fig. 6 | See next page for caption.

===== PAGE 22 =====
Extended Data Fig. 6 | Comparison of STARLING-derived ensembles with 
experimental data.  a, Comparison of STARLING-derived R g values vs. SAXS for 
high-quality consistently reanalysed SAXS data. Comparison of SAXS-derived 
radii of gyration vs. STARLING-derived radii of gyration for the same 53 
sequences as described in Supplementary Figs. 1 and 2. Sequences in which 
experimental data are represented as a red dot are those where scattering 
profiles were in sub-optimal agreement with STARLING-derived scattering 
data—overall, focusing on this high-quality dataset (each of which we re-analysed 
to obtain Rg values using the Molecular Form Factor (MFF) of ref. 63), we find 
even stronger agreement with STARLING-derived predictions (inset). b , Amino 
acid sequences for those IDRs investigated by smFRET in ref. 34 . c, Correlation 
between STARLING-derived end-to-end distances and smFRET-derived end-  
to-end distances. The agreement between STARLING and the experiment is 
assessed in various ways, including root-mean-square error (RMSE), Spearman 
correlation coefficient (ρ), squared Pearson correlation coefficient (r 2), and 
concordance correlation coefficient (ρ c). We note that STARLING appears to 
underestimate end-to-end distances for more expanded chains here. However, 
we do not take dyes into explicit consideration, and it is possible that for  
the expanded negatively charged sequence, a small amount of (negatively-
charged) dye:protein repulsions could account for the slight underestimation 
here. d, Rg distribution for cMyc 1-361 obtained from STARLING ensembles. We 
predict an average Rg of 58 Å. We note this value may be an overestimate given 
cMyc1-361 is predicted to contain several regions of transient helicity, which may 
reduce the Rg, such that we suggest a value closer to 53-54 Å may be a more 
accurate reflection of the expected dimensions for monomeric cMyc 1-361. e, The 
same figure is shown for Fig.  4d, with an additional polymer scaling line (black 
dashed) derived from fully denatured proteins measured by Kohn et al. 64, also 
superimposed. Fitting the radius of gyration vs . number of amino acids to a 
polymer scaling law of the form R g = B0Nν  (where Rg is the radius of gyration, B 0 
is a prefactor term that captures a combination of chain stiffness and monomer 
excluded volume, and ν is the apparent Flory scaling exponent) revealed well-
fit parameters of B 0 = 3.02 Å and ν = 0.51. Black circles are STARLING average 
values, with grey box-plots showing the distribution of values from the ensemble. 
Yellow circles are results from all-atom Monte Carlo simulations. Blue squares 
are experimental (SAXS) data. f , Equivalent analysis to that shown in a , but with 
the end-to-end distance (R e) fit instead of the radius of gyration. Grey box-plots 
show the distribution of values from the STARLING ensemble. Yellow circles are 
results from all-atom Monte Carlo simulations.  g, Equivalent analysis to that 
shown in panel A, but the hydrodynamic radius (R h) is fit instead of the radius of 
gyration. Grey box-plots show the distribution of values from the STARLING   
ensemble. Yellow circles are results from all-atom Monte Carlo simulations.  
h,Rg values for CTD variants in which all proline residues have been converted 
to glycine (P2G). Grey box-plots show the distribution of values from the 
STARLING ensemble. i, Comparison of scaling behavior for wild-type (black), 
P2G (green), Y2S (yellow), and P2G, Y2S (red) variants of the CTD. The large 
prefactor (3.02) observed in the wild-type sequence arises from a combination 
of the bulky tyrosine residue and the stiff proline residue; the double Y2S, G2P 
variant exhibits a prefactor comparable to unfolded-state scaling behaviour 
(see e).

===== PAGE 23 =====
Article
Extended Data Fig. 7 | See next page for caption.

===== PAGE 24 =====
Extended Data Fig. 7 | Microprotein analysis and assessment of latent-
space design approach. a, Microproteins are predicted to be highly disordered. 
The comparison here is the fraction of amino acids in the canonical human 
proteome that are found in disordered regions vs. the fraction of amino acids  
in the Deutsch et al. 44 set of microproteins (the ‘microproteome’) that are found 
in disordered regions. The disorder was predicted using metapredict V3.  
b, Statistical enrichment for each of the 20 amino acids, comparing frequency 
observed across all canonical proteins vs. frequency observed in microproteins. 
We excluded initiator methionine from both datasets, given its disproportionate 
influence on shorter compared to longer sequences. As observed previously 
for metazoan microproteins, we find enrichment for tryptophan and arginine 
and depletion of acidic residues. c , To establish whether the enrichment 
observed here reflects something specific to microproteins or the enhanced 
fraction of disorder, we also compared enrichment in microprotein-derived 
IDRs vs. canonical-proteome-derived IDRs. This revealed an even stronger 
signature: microprotein IDRs are highly  enriched for tryptophan, cysteine, 
arginine, and phenylalanine. In contrast, they are highly depleted for lysine, 
asparagine, glutamic acid, and aspartic acid. d , Assessing designed variants of 
CTCF590-629  (a 40-residue IDR from CTCF , UniProt ID P49711) as a toy sequence 
for rational design. Hamming distance of 100 CTCF 590-629  designs compared to 
CTCF590-629. A Hamming distance of 40 means every residue is different from the 
wild-type sequence. e , Average iteration time of the sequence optimizer based 
on sequence length using 20 replicates per length. f, Generation time based on 
sequence length using 20 replicates per length. Design targets are subregions 
of eIF4B (eIF4B158-611 , Uniprot ID P23588 ), excised in 20-amino-acid increments, 
ranging from 40 to 380 amino acids. g, Ensemble accuracy versus sequence 
length using the same cosine similarity cutoff value of 0.97. Ensemble accuracy 
was assessed as the mean absolute error (MAE) between the generated and 
target sequences, expressed in Angstroms. The sequences were the same as 
those used for panel f. We note that while accuracy worsens as sequence length 
increases, this can be addressed by tightening the similarity cutoff. h–k, Examples 
of IDRs designed to match low-complexity sequences, in all cases done to 
optimize cosine similarity to a value of 0.97. Target IDRs are as follows: h, FUS1-285 
(UniProtID P35637 ); i, hnRNPA184-372 (UniProtID P09651 ); j, EWSR11-359 (UniProtID  
Q01844); k, TAF151-236 (UniProtID Q92804 ). l, Per-sequence generation times 
for the four sequences. m , Per-sequence mean absolute error (MAE) comparing 
the distance map from the designed sequence vs. the target sequence, as 
measured in Angstroms.

===== PAGE 25 =====
Article
Extended Data Fig. 8 | See next page for caption.

===== PAGE 26 =====
Extended Data Fig. 8 | Assessment of STARLING ionic strength effects. 
 a, Overlap between Mpipi-GG and STARLING R g distributions for a subset of  
the Das-Pappu sequences. R g histograms for four of the Das-Pappu sequences 
with distinct sequence patterning as a function of ionic strength. Blue bars 
represent STARLING results; the orange line represents Mpipi-GG results. 
Histogram overlap is quantified by the Hellinger distance ( H) or the KS statistic 
(D). b, Overlap between Mpipi-GG and STARLING R e distributions for a subset of 
the Das-Pappu sequences. R e histograms for four of the Das-Pappu sequences 
with distinct sequence patterning as a function of ionic strength. Bars represent 
STARLING results; the orange line represents Mpipi-GG results. Histogram 
overlap is quantified by the Hellinger distance ( H) or the KS statistic (D).  
c, Normalized distance maps for Das-Pappu sequences. Normalized distance 
maps for four of the Das-Pappu sequences with distinct sequence patterning as 
a function of ionic strength. The top-right triangle is STARLING, and the bottom- 
left triangle is Mpipi-GG. d , Normalized distance maps for ProTα-(GS) 80-H1CTD 
constructs as a function of ionic strength. Distances here are normalized by a 
length-matched GS linker sequence (e.g., (GS) 186) to provide a self-consistent 
“null model” through which we expected the central (GS) 80 linker to reach a 
normalized distance value of 1, implying the linker is behaving as if it were not 
tethered. While not a prerequisite for these types of pseudo-intermolecular 
interaction ensembles, this provides us with confidence that we are observing 
behavior asymptotically approaching the limit in which the central linker has 
no meaningful impact on the resulting biomolecular complex. e , Pseudo-inter-
molecular contacts between ProTα and H1 CTD quantified as a function of ionic 
strength. Prior work (Borgia et al. 2018) has established that the ProTα:H1 
interaction is highly salt dependent, consistent with our conclusions here.  
f, Quantification of intramolecular distances in the complex divided by the 
same distances for the IDR in isolation. This analysis reveals specific subregions 
that are more locally compact than others in the complex, and that H1 CTD 
undergoes a greater degree of compaction than ProTα.

===== PAGE 27 =====
Article
Extended Data Fig. 9 | See next page for caption.

===== PAGE 28 =====
Extended Data Fig. 9 | Ensemble guidance and comparison with IDPFold 
and IDPForge.  A, Rg biased ensemble generation. Ensembles of an 84-residue 
RNA POLII CTD construct biased towards the specified R g values with different 
harmonic constraints. R g values as a function of target (R g) and guidance 
strength. The x-axis reports on value for harmonic constraint, while the y-axis 
reports the target R g value. Elements in the matrix report on the ensemble-
average Rg value under the combination of target and constraint. B, Equivalent 
analysis for Re values as a function of target (Rg) and guidance strength. Equivalent 
biasing using end-to-end distance as the target is shown in Supplementary  
Fig. 5. C, 2D histograms of R g (X-axis) and Re (Y-axis) for ensembles generated 
under the specified guidance. For each sub-plot, the x -axis reports on the 
ensemble R g while the y -axis reports on the ensemble R e. For the matrix of 
subplots, the x-axis reports on the harmonic constraint applied and the y -axis 
reports on the target R g value. An equivalent matrix of plots for biasing using 
end-to-end distance is shown in Supplementary Fig. 5.  D, Comparison of 
idpSAM-derived ensembles vs. STARLING compared to experimental data. 
Focussing on sequences less than 60 amino acids in length (except Ash1, 
discussed below), we compared R g values obtained from idpSAM ensembles  
vs. Rg values from STARLING ensembles. For idpSAM, 1000 conformers were 
used (idpSAM defaults), whereas for STARLING, 400 conformers were used 
(STARLING defaults). We note that the Analytical Flory Random Coil (AFRC) –  
a null model in which IDR sequence chemistry does not influence the overall 
dimensions and instead IDR dimensions depend solely on chain length and 
(weakly) the intrinsic dimensions of each amino acid – obtains an r 2 of 0.9 and 
an RMSE of 3.58 Å. We included Ash1 (83 amino acids) because, although it is 
larger than the ~60 amino acid cutoff used for training data in idpSAM, prior 
work has shown that SAXS data for Ash1 are well reproduced by CAMPARI/
ABSINTH simulations. However, despite being trained on CAMPARI/ABSINTH 
simulations, idpSAM was unable to recapitulate this behaviour. E , Comparison 
of IDPFold-derived ensembles vs. STARLING compared to single-molecule 
FRET data reported by Holla et al. 34. Correlation between experimentally-
derived end-to-end distance (x-axis) and STARLING (black) or IDPFold (Blue) 
derived end-to-end distances. F, Comparison of SAXS scattering profile for the 
sNrich ensemble derived from IDPFold ensembles (red) vs. experiment (black). 
Inferred radii of gyration from IDPFold, STARLING, and SAXS are provided.  
G, Comparison of SAXS scattering profile for the dCh minus ensemble derived 
from IDPFold ensembles (red) vs. experiment (black). Inferred radii of gyration 
from IDPFold, STARLING, and SAXS are provided. H , Comparison of SAXS 
scattering profile for the dTRBP ensemble derived from IDPFold ensembles 
(red) vs. experiment (black). Inferred radii of gyration from IDPFold, STARLING, 
and SAXS are provided. I, Comparison of SAXS scattering profile for the sNh 
plus ensemble derived from IDPFold ensembles (red) vs. experiment (black). 
Inferred radii of gyration from IDPFold, STARLING, and SAXS are provided.  
J-Q , Comparison of IDPFold and IDPForge vs. other approaches compared to 
radii of gyration derived from experimental SAXS data. Agreement between 
SAXS experimental data and: J , STARLING; K, IDPFold; L, AFRC - a null model 
where only sequence length contributes to chain dimensions; and M, CALVADOS2 
for the set of sequences that were predictable using IDPFold. IDPFold performs 
relatively poorly at reproducing experimental SAXS data. The sequences used 
here are the 104 for which IDPFold ensembles could be generated. Agreement 
between SAXS experimental data and: N , STARLING; O, IDPForge; P, AFRC; and 
Q, CALVADOS2 for the set of sequences that were predictable using IDPForge. 
IDPForge again does a relatively poor job of reproducing experimental SAXS 
data. Sequences used here are the 110 sequences for which IDPForge ensembles 
could be generated.  R, Comparison of time per conformation for STARLING, 
IDFold, and IDPForge as a function of sequence length. The variability in 
IDPForge times comes from a stochastic relaxation step.

===== PAGE 29 =====
Article
Extended Data Fig. 10 | 3D reconstruction from distance maps, BME 
reweighting, and reanalyzed SAXS data. a, Comparison of runtimes for 
native sklearn Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) algorithm vs. our Torch-  
based implementation of the Scaling by MAjorizing a COmplicated Function 
(SMACOF). We note that internally, the sklearn MDS algorithm uses a SMACOF 
implementation by default. b , Time per conformer for sklearn MDS vs. torch- 
based SMACOF. c, Comparison of error distributions (3D conformer vs. 
reconstructed conformer) for sklearn MDS vs. Torch SMACOF. Despite  
being substantially faster, our torch-based SMACOF implementation shows  
no difference in accuracy compared to the sklearn MDS implementation.  
d, Example distance maps showing deviations from reconstruction in a 384-  
residue sequence. e , Comparison of literature-reported R g values (y-axis) 
obtained using Guiner analysis in the original publications, vs. our re-analysis 
of buffer-subtracted scattering data (x-axis) done using the Molecular Form 
Factor (MFF) approach of ref. 63, confirming the high quality of the data (very 
similar Rg values are arrived at regardless of the approach used to determine 
the Rg values). f, Theta (θ) scan for BME (Bayesian/Maximum Entropy) scan. This 
figure is generated automatically by STARLING’s BME implementation. X-axis 
reports on the effective fraction of conformers used, while the Y-axis reports 
on the χ 2 value between experiment and ensemble (lower value means better 
agreement between experiment and ensemble). g , Visual representation of 
(ordered) conformer weights. This figure is also generated automatically by 
STARLING’s BME implementation.

===== PAGE 30 =====


===== PAGE 31 =====


===== PAGE 32 =====
